HIP: adding expose deployed chart (#421)
helm/community: hips/hip-0027.md

---

> hip: 0027

Reviewer: this should be "9999", see https://github.com/helm/community/blob/main/hips/hip-0001.md

## How to Teach This

### Documentation Additions

1. **Template Objects Reference:** Add `.DeployedChart` and `.DeployedCharts` to built-in objects with availability details
2. **Upgrade Guide:** "Implementing Version-Aware Upgrades" covering nil/empty checks, version comparisons, and best practices
3. **Migration Examples:** Show replacement of post-renderers and pre-upgrade hooks
4. **Performance Note:** Document that `--deployed-depth` should be kept minimal; default of 1 is recommended
5. **Chart Linting:** Update `helm lint` to warn on usage without nil/empty checks

### Key Example Pattern

```yaml
{{- if and .DeployedChart (semverCompare "<3.0.0" .DeployedChart.Version) }}
# Handle breaking change from versions < 3.0.0
{{- end }}
```

## Reference Implementation

A future pull request will:

1. Extend template rendering context to include `.DeployedChart` and `.DeployedCharts`
2. Populate from release records during upgrade/rollback (reverse chronological order)
3. Add `--deployed-depth` flag (default: 1)
4. Implement `.DeployedChart` as alias to `.DeployedCharts[0]`
5. Include comprehensive unit and integration tests covering depth behavior

## Rejected Ideas

> - **Full Release Object:** Security/performance concerns; chart metadata sufficient

Reviewer: `Release.HistoryDepth` is redundant here, and equivalent to:

```jinja
{{- if lt (len .Release.History) 3 }}
```

> - **Full Release Object:** Security/performance concerns; chart metadata sufficient

Author: agreed, removed and refrenced `.Release.History` and `.Release.Revision` checks instead

---
hip: 9999
title: "Expose Release History During Template Rendering"
authors: ["Andrew Shoell <mrlunchbox777@gmail.com>"]
created: "2025-11-12"
type: "feature"
status: "draft"
---

## Abstract

This HIP proposes exposing release history metadata during template rendering. Currently, Helm templates have access to `.Chart` for the chart being installed but no equivalent access to deployed release history. This forces chart authors to use complex workarounds like post-renderers, pre-upgrade hooks, or manual values conventions to implement version-aware upgrade logic.

> The proposal introduces `.Release.History` (array of historical releases) available in template contexts, populated during `helm upgrade` and `helm rollback` operations. The `--release-history-depth` flag controls how many historical releases to retrieve (default: 0), requiring explicit opt-in. The `.Release.HistoryDepth` field exposes the requested depth value to enable chart authors to require minimum depth for safe upgrades.

Reviewer: I'd remove `.Release.HistoryDepth`, as it's functionally equivalent to `len .Release.History` in gotemplate. Eg,

```jinja
{{- if lt (len .Release.History) 3 }}
```

Author: see https://github.com/helm/community/pull/421#discussion_r2802489594

## Rationale

### Naming: `.Release.History`

`.Release.History` extends the existing `.Release` built-in object with a history array, making it immediately intuitive and discoverable for Helm users. This follows the established pattern of `.Release.Name`, `.Release.Namespace`, `.Release.Revision`, etc., and feels like a natural part of Helm's API.

The history array is ordered in reverse chronological order (index 0 is most recent deployed release). This provides ergonomic access to the most recent release while enabling multi-version migrations when needed.

Alternatives considered and rejected:

- `.PreviousChart` - Ambiguous during rollbacks
- `.DeployedChart`/`.DeployedCharts` - Less discoverable, doesn't extend existing objects
- `.InstalledChart` - Confusing with current installation
- `.CurrentChart` - Ambiguous which is "current"
- `.Release.Deployed.Chart` - Unnecessarily nested

### Always Available as Template Object

> `.Release.History` (empty array or populated) and `.Release.HistoryDepth` (integer) are always present to ensure consistent template behavior, prevent undefined variable errors, and enable testing with `helm template`.

Reviewer: see above

```suggestion
`.Release.History` (empty array or populated) is always present to ensure consistent template behavior, prevent undefined variable errors, and enable testing with `helm template`.
```

### Populated Only During Upgrades/Rollbacks

`.Release.History` contains release metadata only during `helm upgrade` and `helm rollback` when deployed releases exist and `--release-history-depth` is greater than 0. During rollback, the history reflects releases deployed before the rollback target. It's empty for:

- `helm install` - No deployed release
- `helm template` / dry-runs - No cluster context
- When `--release-history-depth 0` is used (default)

### Filtered Release Data

This proposal exposes a filtered subset of release data to balance utility with performance and security:

**Included by default:**

- Chart metadata (Name, Version, AppVersion, and other Chart.yaml fields)
- Release metadata (Name, Namespace, Revision, Status)
- Timestamps (FirstDeployed, LastDeployed)

**Excluded by default:**

> - Values (may contain secrets)

Reviewer: I don't understand excluding this one. Templates already have access to `.Values`.  And helm templating can already access previous secrets if needed via lookup() (it would be very cumbersome, but already accessible in templating).

### Depth Control Flag

The `--release-history-depth` flag controls how many historical releases to retrieve (default: 0, requiring explicit opt-in). This conservative default protects users from accidental performance impact. Setting `--release-history-depth 0` explicitly disables the feature (though this is already the default). Higher depths may impact performance and should only be used for specific multi-version migration scenarios.

### Exposing Requested Depth

`.Release.HistoryDepth` exposes the value of `--release-history-depth` to chart templates, enabling a "negotiation" between user and chart author. Chart authors can require a minimum depth for safe migrations and provide helpful error messages, but this doesn't force the condition—users must explicitly opt in with the appropriate flag.

**Example:**

```yaml
{{- if lt .Release.HistoryDepth 3 }}
  {{- fail "This chart requires --release-history-depth=3 for safe upgrades from v2.x" }}
{{- end }}
```

This field is always available (similar to `.Release.Revision`) and contains the integer value passed to `--release-history-depth` (0 by default).

> 

Author: see https://github.com/helm/community/pull/421#discussion_r2802489594

### Design Decisions

- **Different Chart Names:** Still populates `.Release.History` even if chart names differ—templates can detect and handle this
- **Helm's Record:** Reflects Helm's stored release record, not actual cluster state (use `lookup()` for that)
- **Dry-Run/Template:** Always empty array to maintain cluster-agnostic, deterministic behavior
- **Opt-In by Default:** Default depth of 0 requires explicit user choice, preventing accidental performance impact

## Specification

### New Template Objects

**`.Release.History`**: Array of release objects in reverse chronological order (most recent first). Empty array if no deployed releases exist or `--release-history-depth 0` is used.

**`.Release.HistoryDepth`**: Integer value indicating the requested depth via `--release-history-depth` flag. Always available, defaults to 0.

> 

Author: see https://github.com/helm/community/pull/421#discussion_r2802489594

## Security Implications

**Not Exposed:** Previous values (may contain secrets) or previous manifests (may contain sensitive data). Only filtered release metadata is exposed (chart metadata, release status, timestamps, revision numbers).

**Considerations:** Chart authors should not store sensitive data in Chart.yaml. The default `--release-history-depth 0` provides opt-out by default. Higher depth values increase data exposure; use the minimum required. Release status and metadata are already stored in cluster secrets by Helm, so this doesn't expose data that isn't already persisted.

## How to Teach This

### Documentation Additions

1. **Template Objects Reference:** Add `.Release.History` and `.Release.HistoryDepth` to built-in objects documentation with availability details
2. **Upgrade Guide:** "Implementing Version-Aware Upgrades" covering empty array checks, version comparisons, status checking, and best practices
3. **Migration Examples:** Show replacement of post-renderers and pre-upgrade hooks
4. **Performance Note:** Document that `--release-history-depth` should be kept minimal; opt-in by default protects users

> 5. **Chart Linting:** Update `helm lint` to warn on usage without empty array checks or when using `.Release.History` without checking `.Release.HistoryDepth`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. **Chart Linting:** Update `helm lint` to warn on `.Release.History` usage without empty array checks
```

### Key Example Pattern

```yaml
# Always check length before accessing
{{- if gt (len .Release.History) 0 }}
{{- $lastRelease := index .Release.History 0 }}
{{- if semverCompare "<3.0.0" $lastRelease.Chart.Version }}
# Handle breaking change from versions < 3.0.0
{{- end }}
{{- end }}

# Enforce minimum depth requirement

> {{- if and (gt (len .Release.History) 0) (lt .Release.HistoryDepth 2) }}

Author: the logic is bad here, the intent was to be able to require a depth if a depth is available, but that achievable with what you already recommended, see https://github.com/helm/community/pull/421#discussion_r2802489594

  {{- fail "This upgrade path requires --release-history-depth=2" }}
{{- end }}
```

## Reference Implementation

A future pull request will:

1. Extend template rendering context to include `.Release.History` and `.Release.HistoryDepth`
2. Populate `.Release.History` from release records during upgrade/rollback (reverse chronological order)
3. Add `--release-history-depth` flag (default: 0)
4. Filter release objects to include: Chart, Name, Namespace, Revision, Status, FirstDeployed, LastDeployed
5. Set `.Release.HistoryDepth` to the flag value in all contexts

> 6. Include comprehensive unit and integration tests covering depth behavior, filtering, and edge cases

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Include comprehensive unit and integration tests covering depth behavior, filtering, and edge cases
```
